[Music]
imagine a suit that fits you perfectly
doesn't wrinkle for years repairs itself
is waterproof as air conditioning and
heating and protect you against damage
and radiation and it's all for free
you're wearing it right now this is your
skin or as they call it in Texas your
skin your skin consists of three layers
the epidermis dermis and hypodermis our
journey begins with the epidermis this
is the uppermost layer of your skin this
is your personal waterproof armor that
protects the body from bacteria and
damage the armors equipped with keratin
the substance that makes hair and nails
strong the lifespan of this armor isn't
long but the old cells are completely
replaced with new ones after four to six
weeks
by the way half of the dust found in
your house is old skin cells and they
call me flaky we also completely shed
our skin it happened so slowly that we
don't notice it if you watch this
process in a time-lapse video it would
look like a shedding snake but human
skin is much larger than a snake's if we
spread it out the average adult skin
would be 22 feet square and weigh about
20 pounds or about the size of a double
blanket the epidermis looks like a
factory with endless cell conveyor belts
but this is not the only protection of
the skin time to travel further and meet
the immune Warriors who live here
lymphocytes they fight against bacteria
and microbes that manage to get through
the armor whoa hey guys we don't want
any trouble we're just looking around
our journey goes deeper into the
epidermis bottom the creation of your
armor begins at this level here the
armor is soft and slowly rises to the
top we also notice cells that create
melanin people get skin color and tan
because of melanin but it's not only
sunlight that can change the color of
your skin your skin can be tinted orange
if you eat a lot of carrots but the
coolest superpower of bottom
thermos is how it works like solar
batteries thanks to this ability the
skin converts sunrays into vitamin D
which gives the body energy we're going
down to the dermis now the second and
thickest layer of skin but the actual
thickness depends on its location the
thickest skin is on your heels the
thinnest on your eyelids we're
travelling through skin on an arm so we
still have some traveling to do it's
slippery and wet here inside the dermis
the first thing we see are hammocks and
elastic bands we can jump on them like
acrobats these are two proteins and
thanks to them our skin is elastic and
stretches one last jump oh and we land
near to forests the first is a forest of
nerves and receptors help don't touch it
it's very sensitive nerves record the
slightest touch temperature changes and
sends signals to the brain the brain
identifies these signals and makes you
feel hurt warm cold wet dry and even
ticklish so if the skin is so sensitive
why can't you tickle yourself well when
we try this our brain knows in advance
which areas of skin will tickle it also
knows the strength and intensity of
tickling when we know this the brain
lowers the level of sensitivity but when
someone else tickles us the brain
increases the sensitivity so the body
responds quickly and defends itself onto
the second forest it consists of hairs
that look like huge trees they grow
everywhere but it's not ground that
keeps them rooted but tiny muscles when
you're scared to get cold or even listen
to some awesome music these muscles can
track making your hair stand up straight
there are many blood vessels in this
area to control your body temperature
when you work hard at the gym
these vessels expand to cool you off if
you walk on the cold Street and forget
to wear warm clothes your blood vessels
tighten to keep as much warmth as it can
but if you run a marathon under the hot
Sun look your skin is releasing sweat
from here by the way sweat actually
doesn't have a smell it only smells bad
once it comes in contact
with skin bacteria well now that we've
cooled down time to go further this
level is so beautiful and fascinating
the structure of the whole skin depends
on the dermis it's like the foundation
of any building and of course such a
building requires additional security
the dermis has its own personal immune
guardians phagocytes that fight against
bacteria now it may seem there's only
bad bacteria around us but we also have
some friends too they appear with the
oil created by your glands these
bacteria help your immune system fight
against bad microbes time to dive down
to the deepest level of the skin the
hypodermis it's very soft and greasy
here because of fat the fat is
everywhere but it's thanks to this fat
that we can sit comfortably on our
backsides
but this is not the only good function
of fat the body needs fat when we're
hungry the fat is used like a fuel and
also soft protection for organs and
muscles but the coolest thing is fat
produces the leptin hormone after dinner
you feel full it's not because your
stomach is actually full
but because the leptin hormone tells you
it is that's right fat controls your
appetite not your stomach let's say one
small but very sneaky bacterium has
managed to squeeze through them and
avoid the immunity warriors then it gets
into the dermis swims through the oil
glands walks through the hair forest and
runs away from the phagocytes to dive
deep into the fat layer the bacterium
has passed all skin protection levels
and it's now going to infect the body
but not so fast it gets in big trouble
now
the hypodermis also has immune guardians
called macrophages these cells are
created in the bone marrow at the first
alarm of trouble this group of warriors
arrives and destroys the uninvited
guests and now we're gonna see the
coolest skin feature of all regeneration
when we get hurt the wound is covered
with a blood clot this shell gets hard
outside to protect the body from foreign
organisms then
micro blasts appear inside the clock
these guys repair the wound with scar
tissue and the scar tissue is important
here oh by the way these guys don't
belong to a labor union but they work
anyway that's why they're called scabs
hmm just a joke really
imagine a window in your house has
broken it started to pour rain outside
and you need to fix the problem the best
handyman in the city is busy right now
and you can't wait because rain is
getting into your house so you call a
cheaper handyman who can replace the
window very quickly the house and the
broken window are your skin with a small
wound and the rain is foreign bacteria
what is the cheaper handyman scar tissue
ordinary skin consists of fibers going
in every direction but scar tissue has
only parallel fibers fibroblasts use
scar tissue because it's much faster for
regeneration than ordinary fibers and
your wound needs a fast repair this way
the skin on your scars looks a little
different and that's the skinny on how
your skin works
[Music]